What do you get out of a telephone book?
Tell me.
Demographics, population, where people live.
Well, you've got the census records, too.
There's a lot of things that I get out of them.
What?
The kinds of things we just described.
But do you think that if you could preserve that basically, digitally, that that's just those preserving and copyright copying it?
I don't know.
I have not used phone books, and I can imagine that it's a pain that I have used city directories.
Magnificent.
Do you know them?
And for me, my best use of city directories is to crack the dating of Samuel French Imprints, the play publisher, because the name of the firm changed.
And it's nice to know that from, you know, 1845 to 1860 is called one thing and from 61 to 70.
And the address changes.
I played out the commercial directories in New York City and the street directories, the competing directories.
and put an amalgam of data together to give you a way so that you, when you find a Samuel French imprint, you can look in my guide and you can see pretty much the three or four year period in which it was published.
And obviously, if I were dealing with a 20th century publishing house, I could do that with telephone books.
More likely,
I would do that for people who are not registered in professional guides because the publishers get together and they make guides that help you.
But what if I was interested in a plumber?
I'd probably find him in the yellow books to say that, all right, from 1910 to 1921 in Newark, he ran a plumbing business.
And I don't know where else I'd get that.
Maybe, well, you know more about this because you work in City Hall.
But that's for you to think you're a better judge of whether you need phone books year by year by year preserved somehow.
or whether you don't.
Well, we are running out of space.
You know, the Library of Congress has 120 million items right now.
They've got these three huge buildings in Washington, and now they're going out to Maryland.
Well, how much space does the microfilm of a phone book take?
Well, we're talking microfilm now.
Can you get a whole phone book and a single reel?
I don't know.
On real, I think it's digitized.
Microfilm is, it's all going to be digitized, I think.
On what?
What's the material?
Microchairs.
But they're embedded in something.
they're not floating in space it's like those images from the printing types that's embedded in something you know it's made out of hemp and rags and it's lasting pretty good that's the word i'm writing down now and then it then it got embedded in something that uh cannot last i asked that same question to the woman at cornell and what she said is i can't tell you what what the substance will be she said it is up to us you're incumbent upon us to ensure the migration that's the word they use the migration of the data
from one substance to the next.
because it's always zeros and ones regardless of whether it's on a magnetic tape or whatever but what's it on now all right now how long do they last i don't know well that's the question you see how long the question is is the whole thing and will somebody be there to ensure that the migration takes place
you know at a certain point we had a lot of data on magnetic tape remember that yep we had sensors for instance data and nobody can access it now on magnetic tape now we know first off if you get too close to an electromagnetic source you lose the tape there's nothing there that's right
On the other hand, I remember being told if you don't play them somehow once a year, exercise them, you lose them.
Now, if you're in a library with, let's say, 100,000 reels of magnetic tape, what's the amount of energy required for you to play them
to the extent that they retain their viability every year.
And when they say, now we're giving you another 400,000 tapes next year, is it still okay?
Can you still play them?
or touch them or wand them or something, whatever it is, to keep them viable.
And these are questions we never thought about until when?
When did we think about these?
The next 10 years.
Something like that.
When I think about William Jackson dying in 64, I don't think he ever saw a slow fire.
You know what I mean?
What do you mean by that?
Well, you never saw a chipped book.
I don't think the bad paper had begun to go.
I don't think we saw that then.
And I think I've told you before, I remember going to Paris and looking at these walls of Yellowback novels.
when I first began to shop books in Paris.
Oh, it was fine.
They weren't brown.
They weren't flaking.
And now they're gone.
You know, the shops that are still in existence that had those walls of yellow paperbacks are selling other things.
They're selling illustrated books, or they're all grand papier, you know, they're all on good paper.
But it's just very recently that the whole thing has come down on us.
And that's a lesson for a media exchange, isn't it?
Can we bank on another material only to find that suddenly in a 10-year period it goes bad?
Well, we can test that out these days, you know.
We can test out material.
Well, this is none of my business, and a whole bunch of chemists know all about these things, and I know nothing about them.
All I know is the basic...
The basic issue of it is if you're converting one A to B, how durable is A and how durable is B?
The NEH, I think, came down on film always, always, always film.
That would be interesting.
Would the NEH give you a grant...
for anything other than microfilm preservation these days?
Anything other than?
That's a test.
You know, these guys are not smart.
Do they accept other containers for conversion in funding?
Oh, I think they're really setting up these national digital libraries in there.
Denny H?
They're involved, probably.
You can do a search of... They put money into it just to see what happens.
Well, to what extent are they involved?
They gave everything to microfilm conversion.
i don't know five years ago or something like that they're making these multi-million dollar grants to single places remember i never finished what i was saying when the guy at cornell told me that they raised more money than harvard and then i said well then that's all the more reason for you then to preserve you've got the money to do it
He said, well, our money isn't inherited like theirs.
He said, we have to go out and get it every year.
Meaning, all the money they get are from people like Eastman Kodak, Xerox.
Now, you see, it really... Well, they're getting cash.
It behooves them to do the kinds of things that they're doing.
They're getting cash, and we always go for endowment.
That's right.
You know, everything around me says...
when i'm sent to you uh for fundraising um get an endowment don't uh take cash to do something they're not as interested in my getting uh five thousand dollars from you to buy a book as they are in my getting twenty five thousand dollars from you for a for a an endowment
for whatever purpose, so that, as Cornell says, the money here is inherited.
And, you know, Nick, when he established his $50,000 fund, said, this is restricted to the purchase of Swedish...
literature and book arts uh before um the year 2000 you know so forever we expend twenty five hundred dollars or whatever it is a year on that subject and we have an internal audit comes you know wants it all to roger and says you know we have this best bands fund let's see what you've been doing with it
and i better not show them you know german or italian i better show them you know that it's swedish and that it's a particular kind of swedish or i get in trouble with my
My internal audit.
This is not coming from my bosses up the hierarchy, but this is all over the place.
So that the internal audit can go to you as dean of Harvard College and say, you know, you have this fund for Nigerian students.
I want to see the names of these Nigerian students that have benefited from your fund.
And you ought to go from one to the other, you know.
Well, you know about this.
I do.
I usually try to cross and see what one will tell you about another.
Oh, of course.
That's the great point.
And I can't tell you the state of health of Lucien Chalier.
Pierre Beres is going to see me when I go to Paris, so I think he's going to be okay.
Now, did you call him, or how did you communicate with him?
Well, I fax to these people to make appointments.
You know, I fill the days with people in the same neighborhood and all that.
you know see how many i can nail down and i go fishing for people and asking them if they have anything to show me or not uh whether i should bother with them or not you're still looking he's going to see me he's going to see me but you're still looking that's the idea of these this journey from uh lugano and milano and and paris and and london just kind of out there with your eyes and ears open
I have French books.
Oh, that's optimistic.
I don't remember that.
Remember you said it.
Yeah, I'll never get it.
Some science books.
It's more opportunism than not because...
You know, if you started making desiderato lists, there'd be 10,000 books here and 10,000 books there, and you can't manage that.
That's more instinctive, I guess.
I've had very good luck in knocking off short desiderato lists.
Very good luck.
Richard Landon says that you are recruited to be one of the two or three
It's quite horrible.
You know, it's quite horrible.
You know the name Stephen Weissman?
I interviewed him in London last month.
He just bought a new house.
Yes, I hope to see it outside Bath.
He was the principal...
specialist dealer in English literature in New York City.
which is saying a lot.
And he admitted at one point to Marcus and to me.
Do you keep in touch with Marcus?
I do.
He's hip, you know.
I know that.
He admitted to me and Marcus years ago that we were the only two booksellers calling on him.
We were the only two librarians calling on him.
That's amazing.
It's horrible.
Because at a certain point, you couldn't really build an English literature collection in this country without him.
He needed his help.
Unless you were horsing around, you know, and fooling people.
um because he's got the books i mean you're not going to find some other dealer in new york city who's got better books than he and english literature and a lot of the american imprints too he was uh you know we used to go to seven gables bookshop to michael papantonio and john s van e cohen you know those names and they were the great ones
At a certain point, you couldn't keep building your American literature collection or English literature collection without them.
You had relations with them or you didn't.
If you didn't, you're fooling people.
You're not doing the job.
It's a comment about the libraries in our country that people didn't go to New York to meet Wiseman and get books from them.
It's horrible.
How do you keep up a book collection?
Well, they're not doing the job.
They're not doing the job.
They're not building up collections.
They may be building up copycat collections.
There are a lot of collections you can build up without much effort.
I mean, they claim they're absorbing what they have.
That's kind of an easy way of saying we're not spending any more money on special collections.
We were talking for some reason or other about slowing down the process of choosing acquisitions yesterday, and I was thinking,
Wednesday, Tuesday afternoon, the late mail, I got a catalog, an advanced catalog from a dealer outside London.
I read it that night, and beginning at 7.30 that morning, I checked it and telephoned a few minutes later, and I lost my book.
So I'm interested in how we can speed up this process.
I'm getting orders out.
Because then we get books.
You know, when the National Library of Scotland beats me for a book, that hurts me.
You know, that hurts me.
Can you remember what the book was?
is a German hum.
And it's one thing I've been buying is German translations of British literature.
And you can't get better than a philosophy.
You know, philosophy and poetry and fiction, you know, really hurts me.
Really hurts me.
Much upon a time, I think the silver case at Harvard,
that you were almost, the reputation, the stature of an institution was almost commensurate with the size of its library holdings.
Do you think that's still the case today?
Where you would say, how many books did such as an institution borrow?
It's like five million books, ten million books, or a million books.
That prestige is almost synonymous with the size of a collection.
Maybe you don't agree with that.
I wonder if that's still the case.
Well, Soviets certainly saw it that way, didn't they?
You know, the book statistics from Soviet libraries and all the Americans scratching their head.
You know, they're counting every volume in the set.
Or do they count the set as one volume?
Are they adding the microfilms to that?
How do they come up with these immense numbers?
You know, there's so many times...
The books in the Library of Congress, in the Lenin Library, you know, how is this possible?
So obviously we went through that phase.
You can't do it without numbers, can you?
I mean, you can't say there are 10,000 books in this library and they're the best.
10,000 books in the world for teaching and research.
Well, some people say that one goes hand in hand with the other.
If you have an excellent institution, then you're going to have an excellent library, I guess.
Not necessarily.
I mean, I think it matters to Harvard that it has artists.
It wasn't until about five years ago that I learned something specific about the Stanford Library.
I had judged them on the basis of their collection of opera manuscripts, which makes a volume, you know, an inch and a half thick volume describing that collection of Italian opera manuscripts.
It's very interesting.
But they don't have any books.
They don't have any books.
There are no books there.
And they were buying specimens, a little bit of this, a little bit of that, which is what you and I would do if we went there and we wanted to do some teaching with books.
We would say, you know, we want a few incanabula and some STC books, and we want some Italian humanism and some German philosophy, you know.
So when we sit around the seminar room, we have something to show of different cultures and different genres.
And that's what they've done there until they got the Ginsburg.
Aren't there the ones that got the Ginsburg?
And I still don't understand.
I mean, it's the Harvard of the West.
And there's no library.
Mike Keller is the special collections guy.
I interviewed him.
Their attitude is wired.
They are totally wired up libraries.
Yeah, but we've only been wired for 10 years or so.
20 years.
I mean, 20 years ago, they had no books.
50 years ago, they had no books.
and they were still at Harvard of the West 50 years ago.
Well, the Stanford University Press is actually publishing books online, on paper.
Well, I don't know about the press.
I'm just talking about the university and the library of resources.
You know, to say, all right, we didn't have any books until 1930, and then we got this microfilm machine, and now we've got all these microphones.
That's fine.
But they never had any books before 1930.
And it's extraordinary.
You see, UCLA has books and Berkeley has books, but somehow Stanford has no books.
Why?
Why is that?
I think that, you know, people used to say about Harrison Horvath, it's interesting to know when a collector stops collecting.
Why did Harrison stop?
Do you have a theory?
No.
Why does Stanford never begin?
I have no idea.
I know nothing about the place except that I've always thought it's the Harvard of the West.
And what it is is a triumph of publicity over fact, I guess.
Or somehow they're able to teach courses without books.
I don't know.
Are you talking about in terms of numbers?
Numbers.
Numbers, actual numbers.
Good books.
Value, you know, historical value in research collections.
They're not there.
So it's just fluky.
They've got the Hoover, you know, for what the Hoover does, and they've got these opera manuscripts.
But they have no rare books and manuscripts in the main library.
It's a funny business.
Chicago is another funny place.
For some reason, and you will see this more clearly than we will, because we're looking inside and you're looking all over.
Something happened, you know, in the Coolidge time, and it stuck.
The spirit was here before, because way back in 1818, they bought this Abeling collection of Americana, you know, for Harvard.
And that was strictly a research collection.
about 7,000 maps, you know, and all those American newspapers.
It was incredible.
I thought it was long.
You've read the Harvard Library literature, you know, they bought a few early manuscripts early in the 19th century, and then a long hiatus in the 1840s, and they bought this.
astronomy collection in in germany you know they got a lot of science in the middle of the 1840s and then oh something inspired and then uh it went into the 1880s and they bought romances in in italian french you know spanish and then kludge came and he got it together
The view of a library that should have a German part, an Italian part, and a Russian part, and, you know.
And that stuck.
And it went just fine until he died, and it went into abeyance, and Ty's Metcalfe came back.
It was a bad five years.
It was after the Winship time and after the Coolidge time.
nothing happened nothing happened and then they got ties in and ties recruited uh hofer and jackson and uh they did more probably for the for the coolidge program than the widener book selectors were doing
peaking that.
Just imagine what Hofer and Jackson did to this great library that Coolidge had begun.
Is Anthony Grafton up here yet?
He is a Dibner fellow.
semester.
He should have been here already.
He should be here now.
He should be finishing up already.
And I haven't seen him.
I thought it was spring term.
Maybe I'm wrong.
I remember you said in your comments in New York that he was coming up with spring term.
No, no.
And I think I talked to him afterwards, and he said he's coming up.
And I said, I want to do an interview either here or there.
Yes, you should.
I'd like to do it here.
You heard his paper in New York.
I love it.
It's incredible.
Are you publishing that?
Of course.
It'll go in the papers.
I don't know.
That's the editor's business.
I did my best.
I don't know if I can wait.
for instance those those papers that you had last week clearly aren't cheap that'll take about a year to be published don't you think well i don't usually take that long that's fit so i'm trying to get some pictures and i want to choose the best you know like 10 pictures and choose the best five or something like that and it's a list of students and there's a problem with that because
There's a missing year or two from the list that we've got so far, and Michael has some ideas about finishing it up.
It'll be incredible.
It'll just be incredible.
So we have a list of students, three papers, and some pictures.
And I think we let it go with that.
There's a long list of publications of Winship that Tom Adams' dad printed at the Clements, and I haven't seen it.
somebody will prompt me and i'll have a look at that that would wreck it let me just bury everything else if at some point over the next six months you don't have this in the in the publishing process look i have two of the three papers the third paper michael i will get momentarily i have the student list and
i need a recipe for completing it and uh if i don't have this out in october i don't know i should kill myself uh because uh
Can I get copies of these papers?
Well, that's up to them.
I already asked them.
They said it's mine.
You use their papers with their permission and not mine.
And they should come out on short order.
I'm just sorry about that issue of the PBSA that I really should be sending off to them now.
And I haven't...
Now,
You know, there's one criticism of your book.
That's all?
That, well, there's a bunch of malarkey, and I can imagine the kind of thing... ...carsership and not relic.
You know?
But do you have a sense of what makes the book exciting?
You haven't had sense.
Well, maybe I do, but do you see what I mean?
The anxiety gives us a sense of that in my book when he describes the Guggenberg Bible, for instance, of the Lickling homony.
How the lake describes it when he picks up something and he...
But the farther away it is from relics, the more difficult it is to understand.
Well, I don't know if it is or not.
It's the level at which it is useful for understanding a whole community of commerce and client.
Because
From the moment the scriptoria were producing books for the head of the order or the monarch or something like that, you know, it existed.
You know what I mean?
And it comes into printing and by the time printing exists, you know, there are people who are
choosing the vellum copy over the paper copy and people who are um well so far they said getting the finest
to draw the pictures in the printed book.
I was thinking of this the other day when I had... You've probably been reading some stuff by Nicholas Pickwode, played by Nier.
And I had this book that...
has a piece of vellum, a short piece of vellum, you know, maybe an inch over the edge, stabbed, you know, and then somebody had wrapped a vellum wrapper around the whole thing and hadn't gone to the extent of having it taken apart and re-sewn or anything like that.
It's the cheapest binding that you could manage as a bookseller to keep the sheets together and then sell them to me.
And I'm your most impecunious customer.
Instead of saying, you know, the binder, take it apart and put it in Morocco, I'm saying, you know, I'd like the cheapest relative wrapper that you could please put on there, sir, and don't take anything apart that my bookseller friend put together.
He's on this bottom end of the scale, which is so fascinating, in part because so little evidence remains of it.
Every bit of evidence counts.
And coming out today, you know, what is it today that makes a book interesting, exciting to someone?
And exciting within a kind of community.
You know, it's not like
It's not that one person is excited.
The connoisseurship, I think, you would expect is a community.
So that in Bruges in 1470, a whole community of people would say, ah, yes, he is the greatest illuminator that we have.
Does it have to be physically beautiful?
The context of the book.
Does it have to have these exclusive lists?
Well, then you're getting back to relics, you see.
And that's easier to understand.
George Washington sat in his chair and Napoleon owned this copy.
Hemingway inscribed this book.
It's relics.
And that's really the easiest to understand.
Easiest to understand.
In my weird way, I bought a whole box of Black Panther Party immeographica.
You know, they were running a counter press.
during all the trials but their counter press you know they had no money and you can literally watch these the chips come off this i don't handle them anymore uh in my weird way i've found the money to buy this and i'm waiting now for somebody who will one time handle them in microphone so i can put them away again this is a really weird kind of connoisseurship involved there
Nobody owns them.
and nobody sold them, and if you want to replicate this box, I mean, good luck.
I mean, offer rewards of $25,000 or something.
Do you acquire these for the whole library?
Yeah, I've got them in the vault because I'm still waiting to solve the problem of getting a microfilm because they can't be, you know, if you and I went through them and kept notes, that would be the end.
I mean, it would be chips, like cornflakes.
you know so what what uh persuaded you to get those just what do you think wow do you have a career the other copies are all cornflakes i mean who's got them
Does it support any other collection that you have in the same... Well, if you're interested, I don't know, there's black people in this country or something like that.
What was, for many people, a horrifying period in living in this country because of the shenanigans of these panthers.
And on the other side was manna to a lot of inner city, you know, the whole business.
So this stuff is in the vault because it's falling apart.
Because it's going to fall apart if I don't find a way to.
So what if I'm a scholar doing something on this right now and I say, Roger, I'd like to see this stuff.
Well, maybe you'd like to help me to find a way so that you could do that.
But I'm not going to give you the box.
Maybe between us, we'll find a way to make some money and find somebody who will do it one time and put it back in the vault and you'll have this impeccable film from which you can make prints with which you can teach your class or whatever you want to do.
But if I don't behave properly, nobody's going to have it.
in a year.
You see?
And this reminds me of, you know, Peter Howard at Serendipity?
Who is the guy who, what is his name, who made that geodesic... Huffminster Fuller.
Well, his first stuff is Mimeographica.
30s mimeograph with drawings on it and all that.
And Peter had one of these in the Boston Book Fair.
And I thought, oh, my God.
Why would I get involved in that?
And I would know what I would get involved in.
And I said, Peter, all right, save that.
I'm going to look into this.
And I found, damn it, that somebody made a facsimile.
Bless them, some foundation made a facsimile.
But if nobody had, I probably would have taken that on with the idea of disassembling that volume and getting the best possible print off every surface of that and putting as much of it as I could back in a box in the vault.
And bless them, I can't tell you the name of it, but if you look up in the records, you'd find that some foundation has done that.
Save them.
That's the only... So the only way to save it is to disassemble it.
And get the best, you know, you know how it is with a bound book, suddenly, sometimes when you open the book, the leaves go like that.
That's exactly what you're saying.
And you can't get a viable image out of that.
And that's why, in the old days, a lot of people guillotined, you know, the spine.
rendering the book into loose leaves and then they pass these leaves under the camera so you get an absolute in focus picture of every surface let me tell you what i saw when i went to cornell looking and it's not like i'm targeting cornell it's just they are doing some interesting things i've got this unit up there with six machines where they're scanning books and you go in and they're all old books nothing nothing more recent than 19th century because there's no copyright problem in it
Well, that is an issue, you know, if you're going to do it one time,
You don't want to do it so the upper right quadrant of every page is illegible, you know.
and that's why in the old days of microfilming i'll never forget some they took a classic work out of widener stack a classic work of aesthetic criticism and it came back guillotined and i said who gave them the permission to do that and they said well nobody did and i said all right we're going to buy another copy of this book and charge them for it and then
You know, I was lucky.
I got for $300 or $400 a copy of this book, and we got it back again.
I remember another book, and I'm so sorry I didn't save it.
It was shown to me by the Fine Arts Librarian.
Somebody had gone through with whiteout and corrected all the punctuation in this book.
And I should have said, you know, would you let me please have that in the Houghton Library because I'd like to preserve this.
as a specimen of that moment of where we were in the re, it's not reconfiguration, it's the re, what is it, the replay, the re, what do you mean, reconning, recon, whatever, of documents.
And this was the good time for the offset reprint publishing enterprise, you know.
when a lot of community colleges were becoming colleges and colleges were becoming universities and all that.
There was a need, a sudden need, for a lot of books that weren't there.
And that's where Carlos Reaprain and others came in.
And places like Harvard have the books to supply for the camera work.
Well, you know, they have an industry going at the University of Toronto.
The Japanese, whenever they want a book that they can't buy, they'll go to Toronto, and Toronto will digitize it.
But they want a hired copy.
And they'll
digitize it make a hard copy and uh and for some reason the japanese want a hard reprinted copy of it and they'll cut up i don't know if they'll cut up their own book but apparently that they have a an industry going in toronto with the japanese libraries they really want hard copies even if they're not original and didn't what's the kids book collection up there
And in Canada, the Osborne collection.
That's the public library, the Osborne collection, magnificent.
Because they have a deal with Japanese, too, and they've made sets.
They've chosen 20 English children's books with color.
That's right.
And produced absolute facsimiles.
Gorgeous looking.
I like the looks of them.
Yeah.
Very interesting how things are those.
Well, what do you think?
Well, I mean, it's the endless terrain.
Does it sound like an interesting project?
Endless terrain, but I'm still hoping that you come to grips with this, with Mr. Hitler.
That's the second chapter.
I'm still hoping that you meet some key people before they're gone.
Lucien you mentioned where they're going not Lucien but Lucien Schiller Who else would you like?
And Birez and Romer mentions two people in Amsterdam booksellers.
You don't remember them?
I haven't remember them.
One would be Nikko.
Exactly.
Nikko Israel and
I assume he's a Jew.
And seems to think he's very important for me to see.
And I have the slightest idea of what he did during the occupation.
You know, it was possible to hide out in the Netherlands without being...
being discovered you know it was possible well she lasted a long time i mean that was going on i mean she's not the only one who was hidden and uh she may be um among the few who were discovered i don't know well she was never turned in too so it's yeah but but uh i don't know where it was
But I assume he's Jewish.
I've never asked him about this.
I called on him last year on my way down.
I started in Amsterdam.
I began by calling on him and delivering to him George Goodsby's books.
I said, this is...
It's not a gift, it's a project.
And it's time for you to write it.
Write your reminiscences.
He's retired.
He's not in the shop anymore.
No, that's exactly what you said.
He's not in the shop.
Actually, he published a book on the Nuremberg Chronicle, which I picked up at the New York Fair.
That's a lovely book.
That's by those San Francisco folks.
I paid $110 for it.
Too much.
You paid too much.
Well, where was I going to find it?
Well, I don't know.
Keep shopping.
But I have it now.
And I think they're both dead now.
I think Joyce Lancaster Wilson died finally.
They're both dead.
He was a lovely man.
He was the one who was helping to finance the Davis work on the Gutenberg, you know, the cyclotron work.
And I remember embracing him the last time we took the volume out.
Because I had a notion I wouldn't see him again, and I didn't.
Is Sean Hinman still alive?
I have no idea.
I'd love to talk to him.
The Folger folks would know.
Anybody at the Folger.
Is that an interesting concept, the Hinman collator?
You talk about bibliography.
Of course.
And it goes on and on.
We have the comparator.
What is it?
I can't remember the guy who did the comparator, but it's without the flashing lights.
You do it all in your own eyeballs and temple.
And there's another one now that you can take around in your briefcase.
I have banned it in the room because the people who, the librarians who've watched it used, say that it's just destructive.
What does it do?
It collates one ambition against another?
It's the same idea, but it teases you into flattening out.
you see the two copies and that's what what's hard on us you know if you go through a folio book and you're going to flatten every opening you know well did Hinman resolve that problem with the folios you know they're not flat you know they're
The Hinman puts the book about like that, the two covers.
It's not anything like 180.
It's something like between a right angle and a 180, which is usually the best design for a binding.
Something less than 90.
Something around 90.
I don't know.
I never had to watch people using a Hinman.
I never had to learn this whole idea.
Again, it feeds into the whole concept of texts and the importance of texts and why we still pay attention to them.
Not merely as relics, as you were saying earlier.
And all this seems all out of fashion now, too, doesn't it?
Well, is it?
We're going to find out.
Terry Ballinger was saying the other day, he said, you know, Vanity Fair, Thackeray, he did his own vignettes.
But every time Granite Fair is published today, it's done without Thackeray's own vignettes.
He said, so you're really doing a disservice to the creation of that book, aren't you, in a way, by not publishing it?
And in Henry Esmond, Thackeray picked, you know, mid-18th century typography.
And if you reformat that in a modern typeface, you're doing a disservice to it.
What are you going to say about Wizard of Oz?
In what respect?
To the pictures that came out in the first edition.
Well, what do I have to know about them?
Well, at Christmas time, I bought for my daughter a new Wizard of Oz illustrated by a Viennese woman.
And I thought it was wonderful.
It was very much different from, what is his name?
You know, the thick line drawings of all those characters and the text wrapped around them.
It's a kind of classic integration of text and image from the first edition through many reprints.
It's not Denman Thompson, is he?
W. W. Denslow, I believe.
Denslow, isn't it?
Who did that?
I'll check it out.
What about Huck Finn?
What about the plumbing ballast?
These are very close working.
Mark Twain and Lewis Carroll and what's his name?
These are very close collaborations.
That's right.
Tineo and Carol.
Who is Mark Twain's illustrator?
I forget that now.
Well, I can't do it either.
Place famous.
But this is a good question for you as the teacher of the book.
What kind of text do you expect your students to read to be exposed to them, and what kind of text do you expect to talk to them about?
It's your call.
And if you're going to do a history or a survey that touches these books, and you're going to illustrate, you're going to use illustrations in your book, which edition are you going to choose for your illustrations?
Which will you perpetuate?
We're going to compare illustrations and get something out of that.
Well, then it becomes a scholarly enterprise.
Well, it's all scholarly.
Then what is unscholarly?
Well, I'm saying, but actually producing a book for people, you know, for kids.
Yeah, but you're the teacher, and you're choosing the edition your students are going to read, how they're going to get exposed to it, and you're choosing the edition you're going to talk about.
What side do you come down on?
Well, I don't know.
I come down on the comparative side.
Because I'm not teaching L. Frank Baum and I'm not teaching Lewis Carroll, I'm teaching books.
One of my colleagues said, why can't you just put all the books in class in book stands, you know, open?
Do you anticipate a time... To openings, you know?
You know this way?
Yeah.
So that you'd have an exhibition.
And of course the problem in an exhibition is you only get one opening of each book.
And the answer to that is that I'm teaching books.
I'm not teaching...
single text and I'm comparing books and and it may be in a very very efficient way to teach to start with the binding and the lettering on the spine and the decoration of the edges and the composition of the covers you know when you have a book that I had a book that I was showing the other day for a binding a la grec
you know with a little bump on the on the edge you know and i just happened to see that there's this arabesque in the middle this is this binding system that came to europe out of the middle east right that uh you can just think of all those incutables where the central panel is just rolled down six times or something like that
uh they didn't have any strong centers that you know and the arabs had this strong side well i got a chance to to explain about that uh along with the binding and then opening to to see the ruling of the vellum that that had made the kind of register in the scriptorium that we've been talking about how you get that with point holes in the printing house
mimicking this absolute register where the two pages on the leaf match up absolutely when you look, you know, with the light in back and all that.
So that for me, I'm interested in getting everything I can out of that copy of that book, not just the opening, which may make the point.
um that has to be uh made at that uh point that moment in the in the in the development of ideas and of course so i would like to compare things because i'm not uh i'm not teaching i'll fight bomb i'm or or even book illustration but i'm trying to get uh people get students to think of um
you know, maybe a German way of doing something at the same time as the French way of doing something and what the differences are.
And to understand a little bit better what goes on in Germany because you see the French example.
Well, this one is Medieval Studies.
So we're trying to look at the first hundred years of printing.
But the other ones, as you know, is a bibliography course, 296, which is material bibliography out of Gaskell now.
And the third one is printed books as a field of study, which is that Adams course, in which we just start with 15th century books, and we wind up with 20th century books.
And at a certain point, we look at books the students like to see.
They tell me what.
The Adam students have to be undergraduates.
This is under the auspices of Adam's house, you see.
No graduate students.
And they pay me off with a 35-page paper on material bibliography.
And the last one, the best in the last one, was...
How did Piranesi sequence the images in his books?
You know Piranesi?
We may think of Piranesi when we see him framed on people's walls, but they're all books.
Those are plates out of books.
And there are plans and there are elevations and there's a contents page.
There are details, you know, it's all kinds of things going on in those plates.
And one of the ways in which you could sequence, something like that, and how did he do it?
He's a Harvard undergraduate.
One of the best papers I ever saw.
So he paid me royally for that correspondence.
Well, he was interested in Piranesi.
who else could you pick if you hadn't picked who else would you else would you have picked anybody you wanted doesn't matter the main thing is the student has to know something about it and the material has to be available here so if you're a great expert on something we don't have it doesn't want it
If you're a medium expert or a very inquisitor about something we do have, it works.
You can do something.
We have to have something here.
That's the key, isn't it?
No.
The key is to have something here.
Goes back to collections, doesn't it?
And you see, the fun of this is that I'm teaching with research collections, not with specimen collections.
That's what I was talking about when you and I are in a college somewhere and we want to teach book history where we start buying specimens, you know, one of this and one of that.
You know, it's like Bellinger.
He has specimens.
Yeah.
And I take my specimens out of research collections.
If a student says, well, it's always children's books, well, I've got...
I've got fable books from the 15th century, and I've got just about every genre that you would want, including the 65 Alice, you know, all that kind of thing.
Define for me the difference between it.
I know what it is, but I want you to define a research collection and a specialty collection.
Do you have a working definition of that?
Well, we should narrow it down.
Narrow it down.
In general,
This is terrific.
Well, let's just take the incanabula.
Now, the Huntington Library had the great collection of incanabula in this country, and it was just outdone by the Library of Congress when they got the bull bear collection, and you know about the politics and all that.
And suddenly, the Library of Congress went from John Boyd Thatcher and some other collection, which was a nice specimen collection.
to having a major holding, I mean, tons of incannabula.
And Harvard is nothing like that, but it's got, as you know from Jim Walsh's book, thousands of incannabula.
So that when I want to show incannabula
I've got just about all the genres that you would want to show, from things like the Schatzbehaltar and the Nuremberg Chronicle to the Breidenbach or the fold-out views of cities.
I bought myself the indulgences
And the donatus leaves so that you can see a donatus present from movable type and one cut from wood.
Donatus?
He's a specimen.
But this is out of an enormous research collection.
And I've added to it a lot of things.
Any of the Aldeans except for one or two?
You've got all the Aldeans except for one or two.
You get weak back in the 50s, around the Gutenberg time, but by the time you get it in Canavia, Italy, it gets very strong.
So that I could show you 35 incunables.
out of a collection of thousands of incutables now if you and i are in a college and we're forming a study collection we're going to buy you know 10 10 incutables and those were the only incutables we have and we bought each one because it's different from the other it somehow increases the range of examples right um
But when you think of teaching with research collections, you've got to limit it down.
You can't say, all right, we're talking about modern Greek.
You've got to talk about something like printing from 1450 to 1500.
If you wanted to make a course on epic poems, you know, you start with Homer in 1488, you come up to, he's the West Indian poet,
we did something well we have that book in the first edition uh and everything in between and i just bought another one you know i'm buying them all the time epic poems in the vernacular in the renaissance in the 17th century um
So that if you wanted to make your constructor seminar out of 25 epic poems, you'd be constructing it out of 250 or 500 epic poems in...
5,000 editions, you see?
That's the way it goes.
Does the faculty ask you, suggest to you things that they'd like you to add?
Very seldom.
This has gone from 60 to zero.
Early in the century, you've got scholars who really cared about subject and genres, like George Lyman Kittredge.
He's the one who got us into folklore.
It was an adjunct to Shakespeare studies, and we have ballads.
Not only do we have ballads and chapbooks from the early years, but we have...